Coding for Beowulf paper
16/07/15

Col 1: clause type
m: main clause
c: conjunct clause
s: subordinate clause

Col 2: verbs
auxv: aux + v in that order
vaux: v + aux in that order
aux2v: more than one non-finite verb
aux: aux + empty finite verb
vf: finite main verb only

Necessarily I-final clauses according to RZ (used in more theoretically-
oriented research):
1. subject - argument DP - finite verb (non-pronominal arguments of any length)
Should we be using arguments of length one to determine head-initial?
2. subject - non-finite verb - finite verb
3. subject - pp + some other phrase - finite verb
4. subject - ADJP - finite verb
5. subject - particle - finite verb (particle separately spelled). Right now we're using all RP's (not just P&H's particles) and the particle doesn't have to be adjacent to the finite verb. We won't use particles that immediately precede PPs, because they are probably in Spec,PP (e.g. 2394)
6. subject - stranded preposition - finite verb
7. subject - XP - YP - ZP - finite verb

Co-indexed (usually moved) arguments are of the following types. 1-3 are common, 4-5 rarer
1. NP-GEN phrases moved out of NPs
2. subjects/objects moved from IP-SMC or IP-INF
3. oblique pronominal objects of Ps that have moved out of the PP (in Beowulf, the moved objects
   of Ps can also be nominal)
4. when parts of a wh-constituent are left behind in the clause, they are co-indexed with the
   part that's been moved to the wh- slot (e.g. beowulf 397)
5. resumptive arguments within CP-RELs are, like traces, co-indexed with the wh- constituent
6. resumptive arguments are co-indexed with a left-dislocated phrase

We should exclude 1 above and include all of the others. For oblique arguments, the term in susan.def
is obl-arg-usable (all of dat, acc, gen and non-case-marked, indexed or not, except that NP-GEN-# is
not included. 

Co-indexed subjects (in YCOE, NP-NOM-#) are of the following types:
1. subjects moved from IP-SMC 
2. resumptive subjects are co-indexed with a left-dislocated phrase

We should include both 1 and 2 above. For nominative arguments, the term in susan.def is
nom-arg|nom-arg-moved.

The goal here is to measure the frequency of necessarily conservative word order / structure 
compared to clauses containing similar constituents that are either necessarily
or potentially innovative. For IPs and VPs, we are looking at head-final vs.
head-initial structure.

Note that these are classification features (RZ's terminology) rather than
reflexes of syntactic structure, although of course they can be both -- and all
have at least a basis in structure. RZ (p.c.): "For classification purposes, it
doesn't really matter if there's a theory that justifies the inclusion of a
feature. As long as the feature helps the classifier, there is no reason to
exclude it. At least that's what I've been told."

In most of these searches we're combining main, conjunct and subordinate clauses.
Clause type is coded in col 1, so we can separate out clause type if/when we
want.

IP1|2: diagnostic elements in clauses with finite main verbs: 
In all cases we're using clauses with overt subjects before the finite verb, 
to avoid v-to-c clauses. Note that the subject can have an index, indicating
that it has been moved up from or out of another constituent -- I can't see 
that that matters. We probably don't need overt subjects in subordinate
clauses, but it looks like RZ required this so we are doing it as well. Besides,
we should keep the constraints constant for main vs. subordinate clauses.

Before discussion with AE: I've raised questions below about whether a and b 
should be grouped with c-e,
since they mean different things structurally. But I should keep in mind that
these are classifiers, and so grouping all diagnostics together should be okay. 
This is what RZ did.

Before discussion with AE: The same thing may be true of constituents that are 
indexed or not, i.e. moved
to the output string position or not. Again, these are classifiers, and we don't
have to worry about how they were derived.

After discussion with AE 15/07/15: we will group particles and stranded P's
together, not use negative objects or adverbs (since there are too few of them
in in the relevant context in Beowulf, 0 and 2 respectively), and look at pronominal 
objects separately (but see also SB1/SB2 below).

The diagnostic elements are:
a. particles (3f1, 3i1): we're including everything tagged as RP, not just those
   in Pintzuk & Haeberli's LVC article. 
   We are excluding particles immediately preceding PPs to omit clauses with,
   e.g. 'out of the rain'. Particles don't prepose or postpose, so
   Vf-RP indicates unambiguous head-initial structure, RP-Vf head-final structure.
b. stranded Ps (3f2, 3i2): these can be within relative clauses with the object of the
   P as the head of the relative, or in clauses with PPs with pronominal objects,
   where the objects have moved leftward, usually to the left periphery of the
   clause. In Beowulf there are a few cases with non-pronominal objects of Ps
   move leftward, but those cases aren't included here. Kayne
   in some long-ago paper said that the position of the stranded P indicated
   headedness. Stranded prepositions don't prepose or postpose, so
   Vf-PP indicates unambiguous head-initial structure, PP-Vf head-final structure.
c. negative DPs (3f3, 3i3): negative elements don't postpose from
   pre-verbal position to post-verbal position, so post-verbal negative
   constituents (Vf NEG+N*|Q*) indicate head-initial structure. But they do 
   prepose from post-verbal position to pre-verbal position, so pre-verbal
   negative constituents (Neg+N|Q Vf) therefore could be head-initial or
   head-final. This is not quite the same as RP and stranded PP, i.e. we're getting the 
   frequency of necessarily head-initial structure only, in contrast to a and b
   above. 
d. negative ADVPs (3f4, 3i4): see above comments for c.
e. pronominal objects (3f5, 3i5). I'm not sure that RZ included these (see SB1/SB2
   below). They should work the same way as negative
   elements: post-verbal means head-initial structure, pre-verbal is ambiguous.

IP3 (4f, 4i): the order of finite aux and non-finite main verb. RZ measured this only for
subordinate clauses, but we're including main clauses, since Beowulf has a good number
of head-final main clauses. We're using clauses with overt subjects before both 
the finite and the non-finite verbs to exclude v-to-c clauses, but for an 
additional reason: to 
eliminate clauses like 'go he must'. In Modern English this example is VP-
fronting; in Old English it was something like topicalization of the non-finite
verb, as in Yiddish. Again, we probably don't need the overt subject restriction
with subordinate clauses, but we're keeping it for now. Again, v-aux order
indicates head-final structure, aux (...) v order indicates either head-initial 
structure or head-final structure with verb (projection) raising.

IP4: the position of heavy non-pronominal constituents in clauses with subjects and
finite main verbs. RZ in his paper included only nominal arguments and PPs, but we
are using nominal arguments and nominal/adjectival PRDs.

Note: changed IP-PRNs in beowulf to IP-PARENs so that we could include IPs that
are PRNs but ignore all other PRNs. This seems a good idea in general, IP*PRNs
are a different thing from other PRNs. I couldn't do this with CorpusSearch
revision, so I used emacs to replace MAT-PRN, SUB-PRN, CAR-PRN, INF-PRN with the 
equivalent PAREN. **We should be able to do this easily for all texts using unix
commands, so that we can ignore PRN in all searches. The IP*PRNs I found in
Beowulf were the following:
IP-MAT-PRN
IP-SUB-PRN
IP-INF-PRN
IP-SUB-CAR-PRN
IP-INF-PRN
IP-INF-PRN-1
IP-INF-PRN-4
IPX-MAT-PRN=0
IPX-SUB-PRN=0
IPX-MAT-PRN-SPE=0

-----------------------------------

VP headedness: Do we need subjects for these clauses? I don't think so, although right
now it's coded to require subjects.

VP1: diagnostic elements in clauses with finite aux and non-finite main verb. RZ didn't
distinguish clause types or diagnostic types, but we do (we can add them all up later):
particles (6f1, 6i1), stranded prepositions (6f2, 6i2), negative dp's (6f3, 6i3), 
negative advp's (6f4, 6i4), and pronouns (6f5, 6i5). Note that we're again ignoring 
particles immediately preceding a PP.

VP2 (7f, 7i): position of object with respect to non-finite main verb. Although RZ 
doesn't state this, we must limit the data to *positive* 2-word objects that are not
co-indexed. Also, they can't dominate a CP*, e.g. demonstrative-headed relatives. 
The objects must be (right- or left-) adjacent to the non-finite main verb, except that
they can be separated from the verb by another object.

-----------------------------------

Substantives

SB1/SB2: position of non-subject pronouns (scrambled vs non-scrambled)
with respect to subject and main verb. In the list below, PRO is the pronoun we are investigating
with respect to scrambling.

Scrambling to left periphery is diagnosed by 
a) the pronoun before the subject: PRO (...) sbj (...) V, where V is the (finite or non-finite)
   main verb. [8s1, 8s5]
b) the pronoun immediately after the subject but before the main verb and separated from it:
   (...) sbj PRO ... V. [8s2, 8s6]
c) the pronoun after the subject, separated from it, but before the main verb and separated 
   from it: (...) sbj ... PRO ... V (RZ assumes that there are only left-periphery elements
   between sbj and pro -- check this.***) Note that the pronoun could be separated from the
   main verb by the finite auxiliary: (...) sbj ... pro aux v. [8s3, 8s4, 8s7]

Not scrambled to the left periphery is diagnosed by
d) the pronoun after the main verb: (...) sbj (...) V (...) PRO [8n1, 8n2]
e) before the main verb but adjacent to it, with some element between the subject and the
   pronoun: (...) sbj ... PRO V [8n3, 8n4]

Ambiguous clauses are diagnosed by
f) the pronoun is right-adjacent to the subject and separated from the verb by only another
   object: (...) sbj PRO obj vf. [8x1, 8x3]
g) the pronoun is separated from the subject by another pronoun, and separated from the
   verb by another object: (...) sbj pro PRO obj vf. [8x2, 8x4]


** I think this may be confounding movement to the left periphery of the VP with movement
to the left periphery of the clause. It depends on the elements between the subject and the
pronoun in c) and e).

** what about when constituent between pronoun and verb is a second object? I think in these
cases you can't tell. e.g. beo 894. Or when it's a PRD? e.g. beo 1764.

SB3/SB4 (9s, 9n): position of pronouns, pre-verbal vs. post-verbal, in clauses with finite main
verbs and any one-word constituent after the verb (potentially head-initial clauses). If the
pronouns are pre-verbal, they are scrambled since the structure is head-initial. Note that the
one-word constituent could be indexed (i.e. moved, e.g. split coordination), but this is
unlikely -- but check** -- but of course it may not matter.

Note: RZ uses clauses with non-finite main verbs as well -- this has to be incorporated in our
coding. And it has now been incorporated (17/07/15).

Note: it looks like ignoring BREAK is not sufficient, you have to ignore HL and LL as well.

------------------------------------

Subjects

SUB1: whether the subject is in the canonical subject position in subordinate clauses, i.e. 
comp-xp-subj vs comp-subj-xp. This simple classification worked well for RZ, but we can
also disregard scrambled pronouns immediately after the complementizer.
SBJ1: (10c, 10n), where c is the canonical subject position, n for non-canonical subject 
position.
SBJ2: (11c1-4, 11n), where c1 is the canonical subject position, c2-4 is the subject preceded
by pronouns, n for non-canonical subject position.
**Note: should we think about ignoring unstressed clause-initial adverbs in beowulf? I think it would
be difficult to do with corpussearch, and what would we do with the prose texts?

------------------------------------

VtoC and GEN: these are obvious, no additional doc needed

-----------------------------------

REL: RZ included se-the with se, and doesn't count 0, of which there are 15 in Beowulf. 
These 15 are demonstrative-headed adverbials with empty wh and c, so it's not clear that they
are really relative clauses.
